---
layout: post
title: "igmp: internet group management protocol (tcp-ip vol 1)"
author: "melon"
date: 2021-09-05 09:13
categories: "2021"
tags:
  - network
  - todo
---

igmp is defined in rfc-1112.
it is a protocol to support multicast for hosts or routers, and allow all host in network to know
the multicast group they belong to, and allow routers know the multicast group info of the host on network to
determine which interface the multicast datagram should be forwarded to.

<hr>

### # igmp datagram format
todo

<hr>

### # igmp protocol details
$ 1 how to join in multicast group  
the action of joining a multicast group means: some os process join a multicast group on
certain itf of the host.
thus the multicast group for a itf on host is dynamic, changing with pace of certain process
join or left the multicast group on that itf.

multicast group members are associated with itf: a process can join the same multicast group by different itf.
the host can identify a specific multicast group by multicast group addr and itf,
and the host should retain all multicast groups with process joining (even one process is in).

$ 2 igmp request & report  
a multicast router use icmp msg to track change of multicast group membership on each network connected.

2.1 igmp msg usage rules for multicast routers  
todo

2.2 intro to the mechanism of multicast datagram forwarding

2.3 model of host & multicast routers communication via igmp report & query msg  
todo

$ 3 implementation details for improving igmp protocol efficiency

$ 4 time to live (ttl) of igmp request & report

$ 5 special multicast group: all-host group

<hr>

### # igmp usecase
in many app, multicast is better than broadcast, because it reduce the network burden for useless transmission.
multicast within a lan or across adjacent lans is introduced in this article.

currently, broadcast is usually limited to a single lan, and for app use single lan broadcast,
multicast can be used to replace it.
however, the problem lies in multicast adoption within a wide area network.
