---
layout: post
title: "udp: user datagram protocol (tcp-ip vol 1)"
author: "melon"
date: 2021-08-27 21:07
categories: "2021"
tags:
  - network
  - todo
---

when stream-oriented proto (e.g. tcp) output data, the amount of data written by the app has little to do with
the amount of data sent by a single ip datagram.

unlike stream-oriented proto, udp is a simple datagram-oriented transport layer protocol.
each output operation in a app generate a udp datagram, which is encapsulated in ip datagram to be sent.
that is, there is a certain relationship between the app send operation and the number of udp datagram generated.

rfc-768 is the formal specification for udp implementation.

<hr>

### # udp basics
$ 1 udp encapsulation in ip datagram  
todo

$ 2 unreliability of udp  
the udp transport proto does not guarantee the reliability of transmission, it is only responsible to send
the datagram from app to the ip layer, but cannot guarantee that the datagram reach the dst.
although udp is unreliable, tcp is reliable, udp still has its advantageous usecases that the tcp is not required.

$ 3 ip datagram len & path mtu & ip datagram fragmentation  
udp is encapsulated into ip datagram for transmission, so app programer must concern about the len of the
ip datagram, which is limited by the corresponding field in the ip header.
moreover, the app programer should pay attention to the path mtu (len of ip datagram), once len of ip exceed mtu,
unexpected ip fragmentation may have had impact.

<hr>

### # udp header format
todo

$ udp port & tcp port (service placeholders)  
in header of ip datagram, there is a proto field used to distinguish udp data and tcp data.
according to the proto field (ip stack), the data transmission & recv of tcp/udp port is handed over corresponding
server.
the tcp port num and the udp port num are independent of each other, and may use the same port (8080/tcp, 8080/udp).

<hr>

### # udp checksum
$ 1 udp checksum vs ip checksum  
1.1 the calculation of udp checksum cover both udp header and udp data.
    the checksum in ip header is only responsible for checking the ip header, regardless of ip data part.  
1.2 udp checksum is optional, while tcp checksum is mandatory.  
1.3 the calculation of udp & ip checksum is same: calculate the binary complement sum of 16-bit words.  
1.4 udp data may have an odd number of bytes, so 0-padding operation is performed before the checksum is calculated
    (padding to a multiple of 16 bits), see the udp pseudo-header figure below for details.
    it should be noted that the supplemented 0 value does not participate in the transmission of information.  
1.5 both udp & tcp datagram contain a 12-byte pseudo-header, which is set for calculating the checksum.
    the pseudo-header contain some ip header fields (src/dst addr) to check twice whether the data reaches the
    correct dst.
    twice confirm: ip does not accept datagram not belong to the this machine;
    twice confirm: ip does not send datagram (suitable with other proto layer) to the udp server.

$ 2 udp pseudo-header format  
todo

$ 3 udp checksum algorithms introduction  
todo

<hr>

### # ip fragmentation for udp datagram
the physical network layer generally limit the max len of each data frame sent.
when ip layer recv a datagram to be sent, it need determine which local itf to send the ip datagram
for routing and query the itf to obtain its mtu.
then the ip layer compare the len with mtu, and fragment the data if needed.

$ 1 location of ip fragmentation & reassembly  
1.1 the ip fragmentation process can occur on the src host or intermediate router,
    but the ip datagram must be reassembled at the ip layer of the next hop dst host,
    which make the ip datagram fragmentation and reassembly transparent to the transport layer (tcp/udp)
    of each hop host on network path, excluding certain leapfrogging operations.

1.2 transparent to each hop routers on the path: each of them see the same ip datagram up to tcp/udp layer.

1.3 if ip fragmentation occur in src host & intermediate router, but reassembly is not performed until final dst,
    then the fragmented ip datagram is not transparent to tcp/udp of intermediate routers.

1.4 the fragmented ip datagram may continue be framgmented, the info for datagram fragmentation & reassembly is
    stored in ip header field.

$ 2 fragmentation info stored in ip header  
todo

$ 3 try to avoid ip fragmentation  
although ip fragmentation seem to be transparent to each transmission router, there are still considerations
to avoid ip fragmentation:
even if only one ip datagram fragment is lost, the entire datagram need to be retransmitted, because the ip layer
does not have a timeout retransmission mechanism.

3.1 tcp support retransmission but udp does not, thus even if one piece of the tcp datagram is lost,
the entire tcp datagram need to be retransmitted with the help of the tcp retransmission mechanism.

3.2 there is noway to retransmit only one data fragment:  
the ip datagram is likely to be fragmented by an intermediate router, so the src host does not know how the
datagram is fragmented, thus cannot locate & send the lost data fragment [ref: Kent and Mogul 1987].

$ 4 usecase: todo 

<hr>

### # icmp unreachable packet triggerred by DF in ip header but pkt need fragmentation
todo

<hr>

### # determine path mtu by traceroute
todo

<hr>

### # path mtu dicovery by udp
todo

<hr>

### # udp & arp: the interaction
todo

<hr>

### # length limitation of udp datagram
theoretically, the max len of an ip datagram is 65535 bytes, which is determined by the 16-bit number used
to store the length of an ip datagram.
excluding the 20-byte ip datagram header and the 8-byte udp datagram header, the max len of user data in a
udp datagram is 65507 bytes.
most app provide implementation with len less than 65507 bytes.

$ 1 limitation of udp datagram of the sender  
1.1 len limit by socket api buffer length

1.2 len limit by tcp/ip implementation among kernel distributions

1.3 len limit by user app interior logic


$ 2 limitation of udp datagram of the receiver  
the ip layer can accept datagram of a specific len, which does not mean the app can read datagram
of this len definitely.
the udp programming interface allow the app to specify the max num of byte returned each time.
if the len of the recvived datagram larger than the app impl can handle,
the way to handle the datagram depend on the specific implementation of the udp programming interface.

<hr>

### # icmp source host yizhi error (rate coordination)
icmp source quench error may occur when the router or host recv datagram faster than it can process.
note: even if a system's recv buf is exhausted, it's still not forced to send icmp src quench.

<hr>

### # design of udp server 
the udp server design is closely related to udp implementation.
generally speaking, the design of the client is easier than the server,
the server not only need to handle the interaction with the operating system,
but also need to handle multiple client request at the same time.

after a client is started, it communicate directly with a server and close itself after done the task.
the server is in dormant state when it is started (waiting for client request).
after the client udp datagram arrive, the server wake-up and process the client request in the udp datagram.

this section will focus on the features to impact on the design and implementation of udp server.
