---
layout: post
title: "ping: sonar in computer network (tcp-ip vol 1)"
author: "melon"
date: 2021-08-12 23:21
categories: "2021"
tags:
  - network
  - todo
---

$ 1 the ping is used to test whether another host is reachable.
it send an icmp echo request msg to the dst host and wait for an icmp echo reply msg.
generally speaking, if you cannot ping a host, you cannot connect to that host via telnet or ftp;
conversely, if you cannot connect to a host via telnet or ftp, you can use ping to locate the problem.

with network security awareness increasing, router and firewall emerged to provide access control.
therefore, whether two host are reachable depend not only on a reachable ip layer,
but also on the communication proto and port number.
as a result, even two host cannot ping each other, you can still use telnet to login port 25 (mail service) on dst.

$ 2 the ping can measure the round-trip time from the src to the dst to determine how far between hosts.

$ 3 the ping can detect ip record routing and timestamp options.

this article mainly use the ping as a diagnostic tool to conduct an in-depth analysis of icmp.

<hr>

### # the ping utility
the ping that send the icmp echo request is the client, the host being pinged is the server.
most tcp/ip implementation provide suppport to the ping server.
the ping server itself is part of iputils.

$ 1 icmp echo response & datagram format

$ 2 ping usecase in local area network (lan)

$ 3 ping usecase in wide area network (wan)

$ 4 ping usecase in serial line internet protocol (slip)

<hr>

### # ping -R: record ip routing hop path
$ 1 how does the ping -R print out the ip routing addr list?  
1.1 fill in the IP-RR option in the ip datagram that contains the icmp echo request message;  
1.2 each router that process this datagram write its ip addr into the option field of the ip datagram;  
1.3 when ip datagram reach the dst, the ip addr list (stored in ip header option field)
    is copied from icmp echo request datagram to icmp echo reply datagram;  
1.4 when ping receive the icmp echo reply, it print out the ip addr list.

$ 2 how many ip address can be stored for recording ip routing hop path?  
2.1 ip header len flag take up 4 bit, so max ip header len is (2^4-1).(32 bit ip header width) = 60 byte.  
2.2 ip header fix part take up 20 byte, RR option take up 3 byte, space left for ip header option is 37 byte.  
2.3 each ipv4 addr take up 32 bit = 4 byte, thus max 9 ipv4 addr can be stored in ip routing path list.

$ 3 ip routing -RR option datagram format  
todo

<hr>

### # usecase: ip routing hop path record with RR option
todo

<hr>

### # usecase: ip routing mechanism & icmp datagram re-direction analysis
todo

<hr>

### # ip hop path router's timestamp record option
$ 1 ip hop path timestamp record format  
todo

$ 2 conclusion about ip hop path timestamp record functionality  
2.1 it is useless to record only the timestamp (fl=0) because we have no prior knowledge of the correspondence
    between the timestamp and the datapath routers (unless the network topology is fixed and known).  
2.2 it is better to choose fl=3 so that we can specify the router to insert the timestamp.  
2.3 the basic problem even enable f1=3 is that there's no way to ensure the correctness of the timestamp on
    any router in datapath, thus the routing time (time for hops between routers) correctness is undefined.  
2.4 the traceroute utility can better calculate this routing hop time.

<hr>

### # conclusion
the ping utility is a tool for testing the connectivity between two tcp/ip systems.
it depend on icmp echo request & reply for communication without transport layer proto like tcp/udp.
