---
layout: post
title: "internet protocol (tcp-ip vol 1)"
author: "melon"
date: 2021-08-05 20:48
categories: "2021"
tags:
  - network
  - todo
---


$ 1 unreliability of ip  
ip does not guarantee that ip datagrams can successfully reach their destinations, it only provides the
best transmission service.
for example, when error occur during ip transmission: a ip router temporarily runs out of buffers,
the ip-stack will discard the datagram and send an icmp msg back to the source.
the reliability of ip transmission should be provided by upper layer protocols like tcp.

<p style="margin-bottom: 20px;"></p>

$ 2 linkless nature of ip  
ip does not maintain any info about predecessor and successor of the datagram, and each ip datagram is
processed independently.
for example, the same source sends two ip datagram a and b to the same dst, and each datagram
will freely choose the transmission route, thus datagram b may be delivered before datagram a.

<hr>

### # ip datagram header format

<hr>

### # toc field suitable for upper applications
toc: type of service.

<hr>

### # ip routing mechanism
$ 1 basic rules  
1.1 if dst host and src host are directly connected (e.g point-to-point line) or on the same shared network
(either ethernet or token ring), then the ip datagram will be sent to the dst host directly;  
1.2 otherwise, the src host send ip datagram to a default router, which is responsible for forwarding datagram.

<p style="margin-bottom: 20px;"></p>

$ 2 ip routing to transmit datagram  
2.1 ip routing can recv datagram from tcp, udp, icmp, igmp (locally generated), and can also recv datagram
from a network interface and forward them.  
2.2 when an ip router recv a datagram, it first check whether the dst addr of the datagram is an ip broadcast
addr or a local ip address: if so, the datagram is sent to the protocol module specified by the 8-bit header
protocol field for processing; otherwise, the ip route stack will act as router or discard the datagram.

<p style="margin-bottom: 20px;"></p>

$ 3 info stored in ip route table entry  
3.1 dst ip addr: it can be a complete host addr or a network addr.  
3.2 next-hop router ip addr, or a directly connected network ip addr.  
3.3 flags: it can indicate whether the dst ip addr is a network addr or a host addr;
it can indicate whether next hop is a real router or a directly connected interface.  
3.4 specify a network interface for datagram transmission.

<p style="margin-bottom: 20px;"></p>

$ 4 steps to lookup ip route table when do ip routing  
4.1 search routing table for the entry that matches the dst host ip addr (both the network number and the host number match).
    if found, forward it according to the flag.  
4.2 search routing table for the entry that matches the dst host network addr.
    if found, forward it according to the flag (subnet mask needs to be considered).  
4.3 search routing table for the default entry. if found, forward the datagram to the default next-hop.  
4.4 if steps 1/2/3 are all failed, the datagram cannot be forwarded.
    if ip datagram comes from local, will return error: "host unreachable" or "network unreachable".  
4.5 supplement: the ip routing mechanism must specify a router for a network, rather than a router
    for each computer, so that the router only need maintain limited entries instead of tons of entries.

$ 5 ip routing: local network forwarding (direct routing)  
todo

<p style="margin-bottom: 20px;"></p>

$ 6 ip routing: remote network forwarding (in-direct routing)  
todo

<hr>

### # types of ip address
todo: A, B, C, D, E

<hr>

### # subnet mask of ip address
todo

<hr>

### # special ip address
todo
