---
layout: post
title: "tcp: transmission control protocol (tcp-ip vol 1)"
author: "melon"
date: 2021-09-25 21:43
categories: "2021"
tags:
  - network
  - todo
---

this article mainly introduce the transmission services provided by tcp at application layer,
and will talk about the format and meaning of the tcp datagram header fields.

<hr>

### # services provided by tcp
although tcp & udp both rely on the same network layer (ip), they provide completely different services.
udp provide connectionless, unreliable transmission service, while tcp provide a connection-oriented,
reliable byte stream transmission service.
connection-oriented means two app (c/s) need to establish a tcp connection before exchanging data.

$ 1 how does tcp ensure transmission reliablility  
@1 data segmentation: app data is divided into "best-sized data chunks" for transmission,
   which is completely different from udp, where the len of udp datagram to send remain unchanged.
   how tcp determine the len of the transmitted segment will be introduced in tcp-18.  
@2 timer for recv ack: when tcp send a segment, it start a timer and wait for the ack for the segment
   returned by the dst. if the ack not recv in time, tcp will re-send the segment.  
@3 ack send delay: when tcp recv data from the other end, it will send an ack.
   the ack is not sent immediately, but usually delayed for a certain period of time.  
@4 checksum validation: tcp maintain a checksum for the header and data respectively.
   this is an end-to-end checksum used to monitor whether errors occur during data transmission.
   if checksum wrong, the recv end will discard the datagram, no ack sent,
   wait for the recv end to time out then re-send.  
@5 ordering: tcp use ip for transmission.
   ip datagram may disorder during transmission, which may cause tcp disorder.
   the recv tcp is responsible for reorganizing the disorder datagram and forwarding to app.  
@6 duplication discard: tcp use the ip for transmission.
   ip data packet may be duplicated during transmission.  
@7 flow control: both end of a tcp have fixed-size buffer.
   the tcp recv end only allow the other end to send datasize that recv buffer can accommodate.
   this is used to prevent buffer overflow on slow pkt processing host.  

$ 2 tcp communication via byte stream  
two app exchange 8-bit byte stream via tcp connection (byte stream service).  
@1 tcp does not use record marker in byte stream, so if tcp sender write 10B, 20B, 50B in three times,
the receiver cannot understand the number of bytes sent by the sender each time through tcp,
and can receive 20 bytes in four times.  
@2 tcp does not parse the transmitted byte stream, so it cannot know the transmitted data form: binary, ascii\...
the interpretation of the stream is left to app layer of both end.

<hr>

### # tcp header
$ 1 tcp encapsulation in ip datagram  
todo

$ 2 tcp header format  
todo

@1 each tcp connection contain [src port, dst port], which is used to find the sender and receiver process.
   the src-ip:port and dst-ip:port identify a tcp connection uniquely (ip:port as socket).  
@2 [32-bit seq num field] is used to identify num of bytes sent by the tcp sender to receiver.
   the seq num is a 32-bit unsigned num (0, 2^32-1).  
@3 when new connection established, the [syn flag] is set to 1, and [32-bit init seq num field] is selected
   by host (isn). the syn flag consume a seq num, so the first seq num of the data officially sent is isn+1.  
@4 [32-bit confirm seq num field]: the seq num of the next datagram that ack-sender hopes to recv.
   the confirm seq num = "the seq num of last datagram received" + "the len of the last data part received".
   note: the confirm seq num is only valid when the ack flag is 1 (next data can only be sent when previous
   data is successfully received by ack).  
@5 send ack does not require any dependance, just set it directly.
   however, the validity of [32-bit confirm number] require ack=1, so once tcp connection established,
   the ack flag is always 1, and the confirm num is always valid.  
@6 tcp support full-duplex communication at the app level, data can be transmitted independently in two
   directions, but each end of connection must maintain the transmission seq num in each direction.  
@7 todo  
@8 [flag fields] in tcp header is as: urg (urgent pointer), ack (confirm num), psh (the recv end should hand
   over this datagram to app layer as soon as possible), rst (re-establish connection), syn (synchronize seq num
   to init a connection), and fin (sender complete sending task).  
@9 [max segment size (mss)]: each tcp end specify the mss in first segment (set syn flag), in order to inform
   the other end of the max msg len it can accept.  
10 [window size of tcp]: flow control of tcp is achieved by both end declaring their window size to prevent
   the slow machine's buffer from overflowing.
   the window size is computed using [confirm seq num] as left edge.
   window size takeup 16-bit field, so max win size is 65535 bytes.
   the win scale option can allow max win size change proportionally for a larger window.

<hr>

### # conclusion
many popular applications like: telnet, rlogin, ftp, smtp use tcp as a communication proto.
