---
layout: post
title: "signals (linux)"
author: "twistfatezz"
date: 2022-10-23 22:31
categories: "2022" 
tags:
  - linux
  - ongoing
---
### # What is it
A signal is a software interrupt delivered to a process. 
The operating system uses signals to report exceptional situations to an executing program. 
Some signals report errors such as references to invalid memory addresses; others report asynchronous events, such as disconnection of a phone line.

The GNU C Library defines a variety of signal types, each for a particular kind of event. 
Some kinds of events make it inadvisable or impossible for the program to proceed as usual, and the corresponding signals normally abort the program. Other kinds of signals that report harmless events are ignored by default.

### # Kill -l Outputs 
```text
shell% kill -l
 1) SIGHUP       2) SIGINT       3) SIGQUIT      4) SIGILL       5) SIGTRAP
 6) SIGABRT      7) SIGBUS       8) SIGFPE       9) SIGKILL     10) SIGUSR1
11) SIGSEGV     12) SIGUSR2     13) SIGPIPE     14) SIGALRM     15) SIGTERM
16) SIGSTKFLT   17) SIGCHLD     18) SIGCONT     19) SIGSTOP     20) SIGTSTP
21) SIGTTIN     22) SIGTTOU     23) SIGURG      24) SIGXCPU     25) SIGXFSZ
26) SIGVTALRM   27) SIGPROF     28) SIGWINCH    29) SIGIO       30) SIGPWR
31) SIGSYS      34) SIGRTMIN    35) SIGRTMIN+1  36) SIGRTMIN+2  37) SIGRTMIN+3
38) SIGRTMIN+4  39) SIGRTMIN+5  40) SIGRTMIN+6  41) SIGRTMIN+7  42) SIGRTMIN+8
43) SIGRTMIN+9  44) SIGRTMIN+10 45) SIGRTMIN+11 46) SIGRTMIN+12 47) SIGRTMIN+13
48) SIGRTMIN+14 49) SIGRTMIN+15 50) SIGRTMAX-14 51) SIGRTMAX-13 52) SIGRTMAX-12
53) SIGRTMAX-11 54) SIGRTMAX-10 55) SIGRTMAX-9  56) SIGRTMAX-8  57) SIGRTMAX-7
58) SIGRTMAX-6  59) SIGRTMAX-5  60) SIGRTMAX-4  61) SIGRTMAX-3  62) SIGRTMAX-2
63) SIGRTMAX-1  64) SIGRTMAX
```

### # Causes of Signal (Exceptional Events)
\- program error => dividing by 0 or issuing an address outside the valid range. <br>
\- user request to interrupt or terminate the program => Ctrl+c, Ctrl+z. <br>
\- The termination of a child process => SIGCHLD. <br>
\- Expiration of a timer or alarm => SIGALRM.  <br>
\- A call to kill or raise by the same process. <br>
\- A call to kill from another process => interprocess communication by signal. <br>
\- A failed attempt to perform an I/O operation => reading from a pipe that has no writer gets EOF(not a signal); writing to a pipe or FIFO that doesn’t have a reading process is treated as an error condition; it generates a SIGPIPE signal, and fails with error code EPIPE if the signal is handled or blocked; typing Ctrl+c sends SIGINT to terminate foreground process group, or Ctrl+z sends SIGSTOP to stop any job. <br>

### # Standard Signals
This section lists the names for various standard kinds of signals and describes what kind of event they mean. 
Each signal name is a macro which stands for a positive integer: the signal number for that kind of signal. 

Programs should never make assumptions about the numeric code for a particular kind of signal, but rather refer to them always by the names defined here. 
The number for a given kind of signal can vary from system to system, but the meanings of the names are standardized and fairly uniform.

The signal names are defined in the header file signal.h.

### # Types of Standard Signals


### # Reference
> https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/libc/manual/2.32/html_node/Job-Control.html <br>
> https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/libc/manual/2.32/html_node/Standard-Signals.html
 
### # Keyword Desc

