---
layout: post
title: "static (c)"
author: "melon"
date: 2022-12-11 15:54
categories: "2022"
tags:
  - c
---

the use of static varaible main purpose is to preserve its previous value in its previous scope and
is not initialized again in the new scope (entire lifespan). what's more, the effective scope of it depends
on the definition place: in a function or global area.

<hr>

### # static for visibility
when compiling multiple files simutaneously, all functions and global variables without the static prefix
have global visibility.

1 sub.c: non-static variable and function have global visiblility.

```text
char var = 'A';                      // global variable var

void msg(){                          // warning: implicit declaration of func msg is invalid in c99
    printf("hello!\n");
}

static svar = 'B'

static void s_msg(){
    printf("static hello!\n");
}
```

2 main.c: invoke global variable and function.

```text
int main(void){
    extern char var;                 // extern variable must declared before use 
    printf("%c ", var)
    msg()
    return 0;                        // s_var & s_msg are not visible in this script
}
```

```text
A hello
```

<hr>

### # static for variable persistency (lifespan)
variables stored in static memory area are initialized at the beginning of the program, and they are
initialized only once.
the static variables can be classified into 2 categories: global variables & static variables.

static variables can have local scope but its lifespan is as long as the program has.
the following example shows: static variable only initialized once and has a program lifespan.

```text
#include <stdio.h>

int func(void){
    static int count=4;  // init one time, has entire program lifespan but only has func scope as local var
    return count--;
}

int count=1;             // global variable: global scope & program-equal lifespan

int main(void){
    printf("global variable\t\tlocal static variable\n");
    for(; count<=4; count++){
        printf("%-15d\t\t%d", count, func());  // %-15d means append 15 space right
    }
}
```
```text
global variable        local static variable
1                      4
2                      3
3                      2
4                      1
```

global variable vs local static variable?  
a local static variable is very useful where a function needs to keep some state between invocations,
and you don't want to use global variables (naming pollution).
however, local static variable should be used very sparingly: it make your code not thread-safe and
harder to understand.

<hr>

### # static for variable initialized as 0 by default
in static storage area, all variables including global variables & static variables are all initialized
as 0x00 by default, which may reduce the workdload of variable initialization.

the default initialization feature can be used in auto-ending in string creation.
take the following snippet as an example:

```text
#include <stdio.h>

int a;
int main(void){
    int i;
    static char str[10];
    printf("integar: %d; string: begin->%s<-end\n", a, str)
    return 0;
}
```
```text
integer: 0;  string: begin-><-end
```

<hr>

### # static variable storage place
the static variables are stored in the data segment of the memory (a part of the virtual address space).
accorording to whether static variable initialized or not, the situation can be classified as:  
a) the initialized static variables are stored in the initialized data segment.  
b) all the static variables that do not have an explicit initialization or are initialized to zero are stored
in the uninitialized data segment (bss segment).

<hr>

### # static functions usages
static global variable & static function can only be seen in the compilation unit where it's declared,
thus it is used widely as access control feature, typically good practice.
i.e. if you have a c file, exposing a few public api to users, then the rest of the functions of it should
be declared as static, blocking the user from access to them.

<hr>

### # static to define the min size of arr in c
in c, static can be used in array declarators to specify minimum size of the array.
note: non-function array declarators cannot use this keyword.

```text
void test(int foo[static 42]);
```

function test() takes an array of at least 42 elements.

<hr>

### # dive into principles: how does static keyword limit the function visibility?
ref: https://www.quora.com/How-exactly-does-static-limits-function-visibility-in-C
